COP-6.bis  Final Summary

EARTH NEGOTIATIONS BULLETIN 
PUBLISHED BY THE INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT (IISD) 

Written and edited by:

Jon Hanks <jon@iisd.org>
Lisa Schipper <lisa@iisd.org>
Malena Sell <malena@iisd.org>
Chris Spence <chris@iisd.org>
Juliette Voinov <cedrickohler@msn.com> 

Editor:

Pamela S. Chasek, Ph.D. <pam@iisd.org>

Director, IISD Reporting Services:

Langston James "Kimo" Goree VI <kimo@iisd.org>

Vol. 12 No. 176
Monday, 30 July 2001

Coverage of the Sixth Conference of the Parties to the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change Resumed Sessioncan, can be 
found at:  http://www.iisd.ca/linkages/climate/cop6bis/

SUMMARY OF THE RESUMED SIXTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE 
PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:  
 
16-27 JULY 2001

The resumed sixth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-6 
Part II) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) and the fourteenth sessions of the UNFCCC's 
subsidiary bodies were held in Bonn, Germany, from 16-27 July. 
Over 4,600 participants from 181 governments, 254 
intergovernmental, non-governmental and other observer 
organizations, and 332 media outlets were in attendance. The 
meeting sought to successfully complete negotiations aimed at 
setting the operational details for commitments on reducing 
emissions of greenhouse gases under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. It 
also sought agreement on actions to strengthen implementation of 
the UNFCCC itself. In attempting to achieve these goals, which 
were set out in the 1998 Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA), the 
resumed COP-6 was intended to bring to a close more than two and a 
half years of preparations and negotiations, and to complete the 
tasks that had been left unfinished at COP-6 in The Hague in 
November 2000.

From 16-18 July, delegates met in closed negotiating groups to 
reduce differences on texts for decisions on a range of issues 
related to the Protocol and the UNFCCC, including: financial 
issues; the mechanisms; compliance; and land use, land-use change 
and forestry (LULUCF).

On Thursday, 19 July, the high-level segment of the resumed COP-6 
began, with participants striving to make a breakthrough by 
achieving agreement on a "political" decision on key outstanding 
issues. On Saturday night, after protracted consultations, 
President Pronk presented his proposal for a draft political 
decision outlining agreements on core elements of the BAPA. 
However, in spite of several Parties announcing Sunday that they 
could support the political decision, disagreements surfaced over 
the section on compliance.

President Pronk held ongoing consultations on this section until 
Monday morning, when the ministers finally agreed to adopt the 
original political decision from Saturday, with a revised section 
on compliance. The political decision – or "Bonn Agreement" – was 
approved by the ministers in Plenary late Monday morning, and 
formally adopted by the COP on Wednesday evening, 25 July. High-
level discussions over the weekend also resulted in a Political 
Declaration by a number of developed countries, in which they 
pledged additional funding for climate change activities for 
developing countries.

During the remainder of the second week, delegates attempted to 
clear all remaining brackets in the outstanding texts held over 
from COP-6 Part I, based on the political guidance set out under 
the Bonn Agreement. Although decisions were adopted on several key 
issues, delegates were unable to complete all their work on the 
mechanisms, compliance and LULUCF. Since not all texts in the 
entire "package" of decisions were completed, all decisions were 
forwarded to COP-7, where delegates will attempt to conclude their 
negotiations.

The fourteenth sessions of the COP's subsidiary bodies met at the 
same time as the resumed COP-6. After a number of informal 
consultations, the subsidiary bodies adopted draft conclusions on 
a range of issues, including reports on inter-sessional 
activities, policies and measures, cooperation with relevant 
international organizations, and administrative and financial 
matters. 

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to 
the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and 
well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree 
that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of 
greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human 
activities. Despite some lingering uncertainties, a majority of 
scientists believe that precautionary and prompt action is 
necessary.

The international response to climate change took shape with the 
development of the UNFCCC. Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC sets out a 
framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric 
concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent 
human-induced actions from leading to "dangerous interference" 
with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 
1994. It now has 186 Parties. Six meetings of the COP have taken 
place, as well as numerous workshops and meetings of the COP's 
subsidiary bodies.

THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: In 1995, the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin 
Mandate was established by COP-1 to reach agreement on a further 
step in efforts to combat climate change. Following intense 
negotiations culminating at COP-3, held in Kyoto, Japan, in 
December 1997, delegates agreed to a Protocol to the UNFCCC that 
commits developed countries and countries making the transition to 
a market economy to achieve quantified targets for decreasing 
their emissions of greenhouse gases. These countries, known under 
the UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, committed themselves to reducing 
their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by at least 5% 
below 1990 levels over the period between 2008 and 2012, with 
specific targets varying from country to country. The Protocol 
also provided the basis for three mechanisms to assist Annex I 
Parties in meeting their national targets cost-effectively – an 
emissions trading system, joint implementation (JI) of emissions-
reduction projects between Annex I Parties, and a Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint projects between 
Annex I and non-Annex I (developing country) Parties. 

It was left for subsequent meetings to decide on most of the rules 
and operational details that will determine how these cuts in 
emissions are achieved and how countries' efforts are measured and 
assessed. Although 84 countries had signed the Protocol as of 20 
July 2001, most have been waiting for the negotiation of the 
operational details before deciding whether to ratify. To enter 
into force, the Protocol must be ratified by 55 Parties to the 
UNFCCC, including Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the 
total carbon dioxide emissions for 1990. To date, 37 Parties have 
ratified the Protocol.

THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION: COP-4 met in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, in November 1998, to set out a schedule for reaching 
agreement on the operational details of the Protocol and for 
strengthening implementation of the UNFCCC itself. This work 
schedule was outlined in a document called the Buenos Aires Plan 
of Action (BAPA). The critical deadline under the BAPA was COP-6, 
where Parties were to attempt to reach agreement on a package of 
issues. Critical Protocol-related issues needing resolution 
included rules relating to the mechanisms, a regime for assessing 
Parties' compliance, and accounting methods for national emissions 
and emissions reductions. Rules on crediting countries for carbon 
sinks were also to be addressed. Issues under the UNFCCC requiring 
resolution included questions of capacity building, the 
development and transfer of technology, and assistance to those 
developing countries that are especially vulnerable to the adverse 
effects of climate change or to actions taken by industrialized 
countries to combat climate change.

PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6: Numerous formal and informal meetings and 
consultations were held during 1999 and 2000 to help lay the 
foundations for an agreement at COP-6. At the thirteenth sessions 
of the subsidiary bodies – which began in September 2000 in Lyon, 
France, and which were the final formal sessions before COP-6 – 
political positions on the key issues remained entrenched, with 
little indication of willingness to compromise or move forward. 
While informal meetings and consultations held in October and 
early November 2000 resulted in some further progress, many 
differences remained.  

COP-6 PART I: COP-6 and the resumed thirteenth sessions of the 
UNFCCC's subsidiary bodies were held in The Hague, the 
Netherlands, from 13-25 November 2000. During the second week of 
negotiations, COP-6 President Jan Pronk, Minister of Housing, 
Spatial Planning and Environment of the Netherlands, attempted to 
facilitate progress on the many disputed political and technical 
issues by convening high-level informal Plenary sessions to 
address the key political issues, which he grouped into four 
"clusters" or "boxes," as follows: (a) capacity building, 
technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the financial 
mechanism; (b) mechanisms; (c) LULUCF; and, (d) compliance, 
policies and measures (P&Ms), and accounting, reporting and review 
under Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 
(communication of information) and 8 (review of information). 
Ministers and other senior negotiators convened in four groups to 
negotiate on these clusters in an attempt to reach consensus. 

However, by Thursday, 23 November, negotiations appeared stalled, 
and President Pronk distributed a Note containing his proposals on 
key issues in an attempt to encourage a breakthrough. After almost 
36 hours of intense talks on the President's proposals, 
negotiators could not achieve an agreement, with financial issues, 
supplementarity in the use of the mechanisms, compliance and 
LULUCF proving to be particular sticking points. On Saturday 
afternoon, 25 November, President Pronk convened a final high-
level informal Plenary in which he announced that delegates had 
failed to reach agreement. Delegates agreed to suspend COP-6, and 
expressed a willingness to resume their work in 2001.

PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6 PART II: A number of meetings and 
consultations were convened after COP-6 Part I in an effort to get 
negotiations back on track. Shortly before COP-6 Part II, informal 
high-level consultations chaired by President Pronk were held in 
Scheveningen, the Netherlands, from 27-28 June 2001. Over 350 
delegates from as many as 130 Parties participated, including a 
number of ministers and deputy ministers. The aim of the 
consultations was to permit Parties to present to President Pronk 
their views on his June consolidated negotiating text, which he 
had presented as a tool to help negotiators reach a 
compromise.While some participants expressed the opinion that 
positions did not appear to have shifted since COP-6 Part I, 
others underscored that positions had possibly widened. They also 
noted signs of entrenchment by some Parties, in particular on the 
subjects of LULUCF, sinks in the CDM, and the use of nuclear 
facilities to meet commitments. The funding issue also appeared to 
be a potential problem. Further concerns were raised by some 
ambiguity on the part of Japan regarding its intentions for 
ratifying the Protocol.

In addition to official preparations for COP-6 Part II, there were 
a number of political developments following the meeting in The 
Hague. In March 2001, the US administration declared its 
opposition to the Protocol, stating that it believed it to be 
"fatally flawed," as it would damage its economy and exempted 
developing countries from fully participating. Following the US 
announcement, the EU sent diplomatic missions to several Parties, 
including Japan, Australia, Canada, the Russian Federation and 
Iran, in an effort to maintain support for the Protocol and its 
entry into force by 2002. The US indicated that it would 
participate at COP-6 Part II in negotiations on the Protocol in 
cases where talks might lead to outcomes affecting legitimate US 
interests, or if negotiations could set precedents for other 
international agreements. It would be fully involved in all 
discussions relating to commitments under the UNFCCC.


REPORT OF COP-6 PART II

The resumed Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6 Part II) to the 
UNFCCC opened on Monday morning, 16 July 2001. COP-6 President Jan 
Pronk, Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment of 
the Netherlands, opened the resumed COP-6, noting that 
participants were meeting to resolve outstanding issues from the 
first part of COP-6 in The Hague in November 2000. He said the 
negotiations would be based on bracketed texts brought forward 
from The Hague. In addition, an unbracketed consolidated 
negotiating text he had developed would serve as a "tool" to 
assist negotiators. Iran, on behalf of the G-77/China, drew 
attention to developments since COP-6 Part I, including the US 
administration's announcement. He stressed that delegates are in 
Bonn to complete their unfinished work, and highlighted the need 
to clearly differentiate between UNFCCC and Protocol issues under 
negotiation.

Opening speeches were also presented during a welcoming ceremony 
for ministers and other high-level officials on Thursday 
afternoon, 19 July, which marked the beginning of the high-level 
segment of negotiations, held from 19-23 July. Emphasizing that 
the Protocol is "the only game in town" and that it is fair and 
credible, President Pronk urged Parties not to hold back on 
ratifying because one nation does not intend to ratify.

Barbel Dieckmann, Mayor of Bonn, elaborated on the presence of the 
UNFCCC Secretariat and other UN bodies and agencies in Bonn. She 
outlined efforts to increase the UN presence, including plans for 
a new UN campus. UNFCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar 
recalled the aims of the BAPA, and highlighted the challenges and 
needs of developing countries in responding to climate change. 
Noting progress in talks during the past few days, he said it 
would be a waste to "abandon the investment" of several years of 
negotiations. Robert Watson, Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), stated that all the scenarios considered 
for the next century predict an ongoing increase in carbon dioxide 
levels, more extreme weather events, temperature increases, 
changes in precipitation, sea level rise, and impacts on 
agricultural productivity. He noted that cost-effective 
technologies exist to target greenhouse gas emissions. He said the 
costs of addressing climate change domestically are estimated at 
0.2-2 percent of GDP, falling even lower if international 
cooperation occurs. 

Representatives of a recent Youth Conference on Climate Change 
delivered their views. One speaker urged delegates not to increase 
the use of sinks in the Protocol, and said Annex I Parties should 
meet at least half of their commitments domestically. A second 
speaker told delegates that young people were "extremely 
disappointed with your disregard for our future" at The Hague, and 
urged them not to fail in Bonn.

A number of Parties then made general statements. The G-77/China 
expressed concern at the unilateral approach of the US, and 
emphasized: preference for three separate decisions on the 
mechanisms; the need to address adverse effects; support for 
legally binding consequences of non-compliance; and the need for 
further negotiations on LULUCF. Belgium, for the EU, said it is 
ready for compromises with all Parties to reach agreement on a 
balanced package that respects: environmental integrity; equity 
and solidarity with developing countries; and economic efficiency 
and flexibility in meeting the agreed targets. Samoa, for the 
Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), emphasized the need for 
additional funds to undertake adaptation. The Czech Republic, for 
CG-11 (a group of central and eastern European countries), 
expressed concern with the Pronk text on financial obligations for 
Annex I Parties not included in Annex II, and with proposals for a 
levy on joint implementation and emissions trading. Morocco 
expressed his hope that COP-7 would provide renewed impetus ahead 
of the Johannesburg 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development.


Australia stated that uncertainty regarding future involvement of 
certain States should not stop key issues from being addressed, 
and emphasized: non-discriminatory rules on sinks; a compliance 
system that assists Parties rather than punishes non-compliance; 
and the launch of dialogue on action with developing countries. 
Canada underlined the importance of efficient and accessible 
market mechanisms, the role of forests and agriculture as carbon 
sinks, and the need to encourage developing country action.

Underlining the importance of US participation, Japan said it is 
proactively engaged in consultations with the US, but that this 
should not delay progress at this session. She said Japan will 
exert its utmost efforts to make it possible for many countries, 
including itself, to "conclude the Protocol," aiming at entry into 
force by 2002. The US said it intends to address climate change in 
a "serious, sensible and science-based manner" and would not 
prevent others from going ahead with the Protocol "so long as they 
do not harm legitimate US interests."

Switzerland, for the Environmental Integrity Group (Mexico, 
Republic of Korea, and Switzerland), said sinks should be of a 
limited scale, mechanisms should complement domestic action, and 
there should be a strong compliance regime with legally binding 
consequences. China noted a document outlining its achievements to 
address climate change. The Russian Federation emphasized the need 
for simplicity in the mechanisms, and including sinks and nuclear 
facilities, and expressed concern with proposals on financial 
issues.

ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

STATUS OF RATIFICATION: Delegates met on Thursday morning, 19 
July, in a plenary session to address organizational matters. The 
COP noted that 185 States and one regional economic integration 
organization are Parties to the UNFCCC and that 35 States have 
deposited their instruments of ratification or accession to the 
Kyoto Protocol. President Pronk added that Vanuatu had recently 
ratified the Protocol, and Argentina, Senegal, Colombia, the Cook 
Islands and Bangladesh said they were in the process of taking 
similar steps. 

ADMISSION OF ORGANIZATIONS AS OBSERVERS: On the admission of 
observers, the COP approved the list of organizations recommended 
by the Bureau on 19 July (FCCC/CP/2001/L.1).

ELECTION OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN THE PRESIDENT: The COP elected its 
Bureau members during COP-6 Part I, with the exception of a second 
Vice-President to be nominated by the Asian Group. In Plenary on 
16 July, and again on 27 July, President Pronk noted that this 
Group was still considering the matter. Noting that the Bureau has 
important work to do before a new Bureau is elected at COP-7, 
including a meeting in early September in Marrakech, he urged the 
Asian Group to redouble its efforts to reach agreement on this 
matter.  

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON CREDENTIALS: The resumed COP-6 adopted 
the report on credentials of representatives (FCCC/CP/2001/3) on 
Friday, 27 July. 

PREPARATIONS FOR COP/MOP-1 AND REVIEW OF UNFCCC COMMITMENTS AND 
PROVISIONS

The critical issues addressed during the resumed Sixth Conference 
of the Parties related to two agenda items: review of the 
implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the 
UNFCCC; and preparations for the first session of the Conference 
of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto 
Protocol (COP/MOP-1). These issues were highlighted in the BAPA, 
which set COP-6 as the deadline for finalizing agreement.

The following section of this report provides a synopsis of the 
process during the meeting, followed by an overview of the four 
key issues negotiated at COP-6 Part II: financial issues; the 
mechanisms; compliance; and LULUCF. This section also addresses 
other issues relating to the implementation of the UNFCCC, and 
preparations for COP/MOP-1. These include: national systems, 
adjustments and guidelines under Protocol Articles 5 
(methodological issues), 7 (communication of information) and 8 
(review of information); activities implemented jointly under the 
pilot phase; "best practices" in P&Ms; and the impact of single 
projects on emissions in the commitment period.

AN OVERVIEW OF NEGOTIATIONS ON THE KEY ISSUES: From 16-18 July, 
delegates met in closed negotiating groups, which aimed to 
identify the key political issues to be resolved by ministers and 
high-level officials. Discussions during these three days were 
held on the basis of negotiating texts carried over from COP-6 
Part I (see FCCC/CP/2000/5/Add.3, "Part Three: Texts forwarded to 
the resumed sixth session by the COP at the first part of its 
sixth session," Volumes I – V). These texts covered all issues 
under negotiation, although many paragraphs remained heavily 
bracketed. In addition, an unbracketed consolidated negotiating 
text proposed in June by President Pronk served as a key "tool" 
for supporting the negotiations. This tool addressed critical 
areas where disagreements remain, and attempted to establish a 
balanced package of decisions on all issues covered by the BAPA.

High-level Segment (19-23 July): On Thursday, 19 July, the high-
level segment of COP-6 Part II began, with ministers and other 
senior government officials in attendance. In their deliberations, 
ministers and other officials began by considering a Note by the 
Co-Chairs of the negotiating groups (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.8), a 
"streamlined document" that outlined clear options on all the key 
outstanding political issues. They met in a main negotiating 
group, known as the President's Group, as well as in four groups 
considering the key issues. Substantive work began on Friday, 20 
July.

Ministers and high-level officials met throughout the weekend and 
into Monday morning. On Saturday night, 21 July, President Pronk 
observed signs of an "increasing consensus" and presented his 
proposal for a draft decision outlining political agreements on 
"core elements" of the BAPA. Notable features of the proposal 
included: activities under Protocol Article 3.4 (additional 
activities) during the first commitment period, with individual 
Party caps on credits from forest management; afforestation and 
reforestation projects in the CDM during the first commitment 
period; a political declaration "inviting" funding from Annex II 
Parties; enforcement consequences aimed at restoring non-
compliance and repairing damage to the environment in cases of 
non-compliance; Annex I Parties refraining from using nuclear 
facilities in the CDM and JI; domestic action constituting a 
"significant element" of Annex I Parties' efforts to meet 
commitments; and the establishment of funds for developing country 
activities.

However, in spite of several Parties announcing Sunday that they 
could support the political decision, disagreements surfaced over 
the section on compliance. President Pronk held further intensive 
consultations on this section throughout Sunday night and into 
Monday morning, resulting in an agreement to adopt the original 
political decision from Saturday, with a revised section on 
compliance.

Bonn Agreement: The political decision was approved by ministers 
in a plenary session held Monday, and formally adopted by the COP 
on Wednesday evening, 25 July (FCCC/CP/2001/L.7), after disputes 
relating to "technical" and "editorial" changes made to the text 
Monday night had been resolved.

Political Declaration: Discussion over the weekend also resulted 
in a Political Declaration by the EU, Canada, Iceland, Norway, New 
Zealand and Switzerland on funding for developing countries. This 
Declaration includes an undertaking to provide an annual 
contribution of US$410 million by 2005. 

Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: During the remainder of the 
second week, delegates agreed to resume in their negotiating 
groups in an attempt to clear the remaining brackets in all 
outstanding texts held over from The Hague, so as to reflect the 
Bonn Agreement. Although consensus was reached on several key 
issues, delegates were unable to complete their work after 
disagreements continued over the draft decisions on the 
mechanisms, compliance and LULUCF. Delegates will attempt to 
conclude their work on the outstanding issues at COP-7.

FINANCIAL ISSUES: The negotiations on financial issues addressed 
capacity building, technology transfer, adaptation, UNFCCC Article 
4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse effects), 
and funding. These issues were dealt with in a negotiating group 
co-chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Andrej Kranjc 
(Slovenia), as well as in several sub-groups and drafting groups. 
Some financial matters, especially those relating to funding, were 
discussed as cross-cutting issues. 

Delegates met in a closed negotiating group from 16-18 July, with 
discussions addressing a variety of issues, including: concerns 
about overburdening the Global Environment Facility (GEF); the 
implications of relying on sources of information other than 
national communications to determine action related to adaptation; 
the specific concerns of least developed countries (LDCs); 
institutional arrangements for technology transfer; the role and 
composition of the technology transfer body of experts; and 
proposals on funding, including whether to have voluntary or 
mandatory levels of contribution. The group's discussions resulted 
in agreement on the two draft decisions on capacity building. 
Together with the Co-Chairs of the four negotiating groups, Co-
Chairs Ashe and Kranjc prepared a Note (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8) 
outlining clear options on the key outstanding political issues.

Ministers and other-high level officials began their substantive 
discussions based on this Note on 19 July, with informal high-
level consultations on finance facilitated by Secretary of State 
Philippe Roch (Switzerland). One issue during the high-level 
segment was the question of "mandatory" or "voluntary" funding. 
However, developing countries compromised by agreeing not to 
insist on mandatory funding. 

Bonn Agreement: The political decision agreed on Monday, 23 July, 
and formally adopted by the COP on Wednesday, 25 July, contains 
five sections related to the financial issues.

Funding under the UNFCCC: The COP agrees that Annex II Parties, 
and other Annex I Parties that are in a position to do so, should 
provide funding to meet the commitments under UNFCCC Article 4.1 
(commitments), 4.3 (funding), 4.4 (adaptation), 4.5 (technology 
transfer), 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects) through the GEF 
replenishment, the proposed special climate change fund, and 
bilateral and multilateral channels. It further provides that 
appropriate modalities for burden sharing among Annex II Parties 
need to be developed. It specifies that the special climate change 
fund is to be established to finance activities related to climate 
change that are complementary to those funded by the resources 
allocated to the GEF and bilateral and multilateral funding. These 
activities include adaptation, technology transfer, energy, 
transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management, 
as well as activities to assist developing countries diversify 
their economies. The text also proposes that an LDC fund be 
established, including for the purpose of funding NAPAs. 

Funding under the Kyoto Protocol: The COP agrees that appropriate 
modalities for burden sharing need to be developed. It confirms 
the establishment of the adaptation fund to finance concrete 
adaptation projects in Parties to the Protocol. The adaptation 
fund is to be financed from the share of proceeds on the CDM 
project activities and other sources of funding. Annex I Parties 
are invited to provide this additional funding. The fund is to be 
operated by an entity operating the financial mechanism of the 
UNFCCC.

Development and Transfer of Technologies: The COP agrees to 
establish an Expert Group on Technology Transfer comprised of 20 
experts: three from each region of non-Annex I Parties; one from 
the Small Island Developing States (SIDS); seven from Annex I 
Parties; and three from relevant international organizations. 

Implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol Articles 
2.3 and 3.14: The COP agrees that the implementation of identified 
activities in response to adverse effects of climate change be 
supported through the GEF, the proposed special climate change 
fund, and other bilateral and multilateral sources. The COP also 
agrees to consider at its eighth session the implementation of 
insurance-related actions to meet the specific needs and concerns 
of developing country Parties arising from the adverse effects of 
climate change, based on the outcome of workshops on insurance. On 
impact of response measures, it agrees to support the 
implementation of identified activities through the GEF, the 
special climate change fund and other bilateral and multilateral 
sources. 

Matters relating to Protocol Article 3.14: The COP recognizes that 
minimizing the impact of the implementation of Protocol Article 
3.1 (quantitative emissions commitments) is a development concern 
affecting both developed and developing countries. It recommends 
that the COP/MOP request Annex I Parties to provide information, 
as part of the necessary supplementary information to their annual 
inventory report, on how they are striving to implement 
commitments under Article 3.1 in such a way as to minimize adverse 
social, environmental and economic impacts on developing country 
Parties. Priority should be given to the implementation of the 
following actions: 

	progressive reduction or phasing out of market imperfections, 
fiscal incentives, tax and duty exemptions and subsidies in all 
greenhouse gas emitting sectors, taking into account the need for 
energy price reforms to reflect market prices and externalities; 

	cooperation in the technological development of non-energy 
uses of fossil fuels, and support to developing country Parties to 
this end; and

	assistance to developing country Parties highly dependent on 
the export and consumption of fossil fuels in diversifying their 
economies.

Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: Based on the political guidance 
provided by the Bonn Agreement, the negotiating group on finance 
resumed its work on the draft decisions forwarded from The Hague 
to address outstanding text for draft decisions on adverse 
effects, technology transfer and funding. The group approved draft 
decisions on: UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9; Protocol Article 3.14; 
funding under UNFCCC; funding under the Protocol; technology 
transfer; and guidance to the GEF.

On Friday, 27 July, delegates met in Plenary and approved all 
eight draft decisions that had been agreed in the negotiating 
group and sub-groups. Co-Chairs Ashe and Kranjc reported on the 
success of the group, and requested the draft decisions to be 
considered by the COP.

Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7: The eight draft decisions 
completed on financial issues were the only ones of the four main 
negotiating groups on which consensus had been achieved. The draft 
decisions build on the Bonn Agreement and the following summaries 
of these decisions focus on the elements elaborating on this 
agreement. 

Capacity Building: The draft decision on capacity building in 
developing countries (FCCC/CP/2001/L.2) requests the GEF to report 
on its progress in support of the implementation of the capacity-
building framework, and urges an operating entity of the financial 
mechanism to adopt a streamlined and expedited approach in 
financing activities of the framework. It requests the COP to draw 
on information from national communications and reports from the 
GEF and other agencies for the review of progress in the 
implementation of the framework. The second draft decision, on 
capacity building in EITs (FCCC/CP/2001/L.3), sets out in an annex 
a capacity-building framework. It recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt 
a decision endorsing a framework for capacity building under the 
UNFCCC that parallels the framework contained in the annex. Both 
draft decisions give immediate effect to the frameworks.

Guidance to the GEF: This draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.4/Rev.1) 
states that the GEF should provide financial resources to 
developing country Parties, in particular to the LDCs and SIDS, 
including for implementing Stage II adaptation activities and 
establishing pilot or demonstration projects to show how 
adaptation planning and assessment can be translated into 
projects. The draft decision further urges the GEF to adopt a 
streamlined approach in financing activities within the framework 
for capacity building in developing countries.

Development and Transfer of Technologies: The draft decision 
(FCCC/CP/2001/L.10) establishes an expert group on technology 
transfer and requests the GEF to provide financial support through 
the special climate change fund for the implementation of the 
framework annexed to the draft decision.

Adverse Effects: Parties agreed to separate decisions on UNFCCC 
Article 4.8 and 4.9, and Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse effects). 
The draft decision on implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 
(FCCC/CP/2001/L.12) states that the GEF should support activities 
on information and methodologies, and on vulnerability and 
adaptation. It also decides that the special climate change fund 
and/or the adaptation fund and other bilateral and multilateral 
sources should fund activities on adaptation, improving and 
monitoring of diseases and vectors, and capacity building. It 
further decides to establish a work programme on LDCs to: 
strengthen existing and establish national climate change 
secretariats; provide training in negotiating skills and language; 
and support the preparation of NAPAs. In addition, the decision 
provides for the establishment of an LDC fund. It also decides 
that the GEF, the special climate change fund and other bilateral 
and multilateral sources should fund activities to assist LDCs. 

The draft decision on Protocol Article 3.14 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.13) 
decides to develop guidelines to help determine if Annex I Parties 
are striving to minimize adverse effects, and agrees that Annex II 
Parties should give priority to assisting developing countries 
highly dependent on the export and consumption of fossil fuels in 
diversifying their economies.

Funding: The draft decision on funding under the UNFCCC 
(FCCC/CP/2001/L.14) states that: there is a need for funding that 
is new and additional to GEF and multilateral and bilateral 
funding; predictable funding should be available to non-Annex I 
Parties; and a special climate change fund should be established. 
The draft decision on funding under the Protocol 
(FCCC/CP/2001/L.15) establishes an adaptation fund.

MECHANISMS: Delegates met from 16-18 July in a closed negotiating 
group chaired by Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) and Kok Kee Chow 
(Malaysia). The group considered The Hague and Pronk texts, and 
identified the key political and technical issues to be resolved. 
The six key "technical issues" were: environmental impact 
assessments; public participation; baselines; small-scale projects 
in the CDM; certified emissions reduction (CER) transactions; and 
mechanisms' eligibility and the verification procedures that may 
be used in track two of JI projects.

The key political issues included: equity; supplementarity; 
nuclear facilities in the CDM and JI; establishment and 
composition of a supervisory committee for verification of CERs; 
composition of the CDM Executive Board; level of the commitment 
period reserve; application of share of proceeds to all three 
mechanisms; the requirement that Annex I Parties' use of CERs be 
conditional on it being party to the compliance agreement; 
unilateral CDM; and sinks in the CDM. On sinks in the CDM, Co-
Chair Estrada ruled against a request from a number of Umbrella 
Group countries that an option be included providing for all sinks 
project types within the CDM. Delegates also considered the 
following political issues identified by the G-77/China: the lack 
of parity between Annex I Parties under Protocol Article 4 (joint 
fulfillment) and other Parties; the need for special consideration 
for LDCs; financial additionality; and the equitable distribution 
of CDM projects on a geographical basis.

Various options were presented for each of the political issues in 
a Co-Chairs' Note (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8) for consideration during 
the high-level segment. On Friday these discussions took place 
within the President's Group, chaired by President Pronk, while on 
Saturday the discussions on mechanisms were in a sub-group 
facilitated by Minister Peter Hodgson (New Zealand). On the basis 
of the high-level negotiations, President Pronk produced a "core 
elements" proposal late on Saturday night. The text relating to 
mechanisms in this proposal was accepted on Monday, 23 July, and 
forms part of the Bonn Agreement. 

Bonn Agreement: The political agreement on mechanisms addresses: 
principles, nature and scope; JI; CDM; and emissions trading. 

Principles, Nature and Scope: The text on principles, nature and 
scope provides for, inter alia, issues relating to equity, 
supplementarity, share of proceeds and eligibility. On equity, the 
COP agrees that Annex I Parties shall implement domestic action in 
accordance with national circumstances and with a view to reducing 
emissions in a manner conducive to narrowing per capita 
differences in emissions between developed and developing country 
Parties. The COP agrees that the share of proceeds, to assist 
particularly vulnerable developing countries to meet adaptation 
costs, shall be two percent of the CERs for a CDM project 
activity. 

On supplementarity, the COP agrees that:

	the use of mechanisms shall be supplemental to domestic 
action and that domestic action shall constitute a "significant 
element" of the effort made by each Annex I Party to fulfill 
Protocol Article 3.1 (quantitative emissions commitments); 

	Annex I Parties shall be requested to provide relevant 
information in relation to their supplemental activities, in 
accordance with Protocol Article 7 (communication of information), 
for review under Protocol Article 8 (review of information); 

	the provision of such information shall take into account 
reporting on "demonstrable progress"; and 

	the Compliance Committee's facilitative branch shall address 
questions of implementation.

On eligibility, the COP agrees that a recommendation be made to 
the COP/MOP that the eligibility of an Annex I Party to 
participate in the mechanisms shall be dependent on its compliance 
with methodological and reporting requirements under Protocol 
Articles 5 and 7, with oversight being provided by the Compliance 
Committee's enforcement branch. Furthermore, "only Parties that 
have accepted the agreement on compliance supplementing the Kyoto 
Protocol shall be entitled to transfer or acquire credits 
generated by the use of the mechanisms."

JI and the CDM: The COP agrees that it is the host Party's 
prerogative to confirm whether JI/CDM project activities assist in 
achieving sustainable development, and that Annex I Parties 
"refrain" from using Emission Reduction Units (ERUs)/CERs 
generated from nuclear facilities to meet Article 3.1 commitments. 
On JI, the COP agrees to recommend to the COP/MOP the 
establishment of a supervisory committee to supervise, inter alia, 
the verification of ERUs. 

On the CDM, the COP agrees to emphasize that public funding for 
CDM projects from Annex I Parties is not to result in the 
diversion of ODA, and is to be separate from and not counted 
towards the financial obligations of Annex I Parties. It also 
agrees to facilitate a prompt start for the CDM and to invite 
nominations for membership of the executive board prior to COP-7 
with a view to electing members at that session. 

On the CDM executive board, the text states that the board shall 
comprise ten members with one from each UN regional group, two 
others from Annex I Parties, two others from non-Annex I Parties, 
and one representative of SIDS. The board shall develop and 
recommend to COP-8 simplified modalities and procedures for small-
scale CDM project activities on: renewable energy projects with a 
maximum output capacity equivalent of up to 15 megawatts; energy 
efficiency improvement projects that reduce energy consumption on 
the supply and/or demand side by up to the equivalent of 18 
gigawatthours per year; or other projects that both reduce 
anthropogenic emissions by sources and directly emit less that 15 
kilotonnes of CO2 equivalent. 

On sinks in the CDM, the COP agrees that afforestation and 
reforestation shall be the only eligible LULUCF projects under the 
CDM during the first commitment period, with implementation of 
these projects guided by the LULUCF principles defined elsewhere 
in the annex and by the definitions and modalities developed by 
SBSTA for decision at COP-8 including on non-permanence, 
additionality, leakage, scale uncertainties, and socio-economic 
and environmental impacts. LULUCF activities under the CDM in 
future commitment periods are to be decided in negotiations on the 
second commitment period. 

Emissions Trading: On emissions trading, the COP agrees to 
recommend to the COP/MOP that each Annex I Party shall maintain in 
its national registry a commitment period reserve that should not 
drop below 90% of the Party's assigned amount, calculated in terms 
of Protocol Article 3.7 (individual assigned amounts) and 3.8 
(base-year) or 100% of five times its most recently reviewed 
inventory, whichever is lowest.

Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: Following approval of the 
political agreement on mechanisms, the negotiating group on 
mechanisms reconvened on Wednesday and Thursday, 25-26 July, to 
address the remaining technical issues. On Wednesday evening the 
group received feedback from the two technical sub-groups, and 
undertook a brief review of a Co-Chairs' proposed non-paper - a 
consolidation of the political agreement, the Hague text, the 
Pronk text, and text agreed in the technical working groups. On 
Thursday, the mechanisms group continued consideration of the Co-
Chairs' non-paper. Co-Chair Estrada noted that the draft decisions 
on mechanisms had been reformulated to reflect the political 
decision. The EU said an error had been made in the decision on 
eligibility, which now included reference to the "legal" agreement 
on compliance. Australia, Canada and Japan urged consistency to 
reflect the political decision's section on compliance. 

In the closing Plenary on Friday, 27 July, Co-Chair Estrada 
presented the Co-Chairs' draft decisions on mechanisms 
(FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.11). This text represents a work in progress. To 
facilitate the future work of parties, a key has been used to 
distinguish between: text that was agreed in the high-level 
segment; text agreed in the technical groups; text partially 
agreed in the technical groups; and text that was either not 
agreed or which has not yet been considered. The Plenary took note 
of these draft decisions and appendices, which will be further 
considered, elaborated and adopted at COP-7.

Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7: The draft decisions to be 
considered further at COP-7 include: 

	a draft decision on principles, nature and scope of the 
mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17; 

	a draft decision on guidelines for the implementation of 
Article 6, including an annex setting out the guidelines; 

	a draft decision on modalities and procedures for a clean 
development mechanism, as defined in Article 12, including an 
annex setting out these modalities and procedures, and several 
appendices; and 

	a draft decision on modalities, rules and guidelines for 
emissions trading, including an annex.

LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY (LULUCF): LULUCF was 
considered in a closed negotiating group co-chaired by Harald 
Dovland (Norway) and Philip Gwage (Uganda) from 16-18 July. The 
group sought to reduce differences on key outstanding issues, 
including whether Article 3.4 (additional activities) should be 
allowed during the first commitment period, and options for 
limiting the activities; principles governing LULUCF activities; 
and Article 3.3 (afforestation, reforestation and deforestation) 
and 3.4 definitions and accounting rules. On Article 3.4 
activities, some countries opposed their inclusion, stressing that 
it represents a renegotiation of the Kyoto targets and undermines 
the integrity of the Protocol. Other Parties emphasized that 
LULUCF is fundamental to ratification. Canada, Australia and 
Japan, joined by the Russian Federation, presented a proposal on 
Article 3.4 forest management, which relied on negotiated maximum 
levels of forest management credits for individual countries. This 
proposal – as well as proposals by New Zealand and the EU – set 
the stage for the high-level negotiations. The discussions were 
based on the Pronk text as well as text carried over from The 
Hague. Based on these and previous discussions, a Note was 
prepared by the Co-Chairs of the four negotiating groups 
(FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8) outlining clear options.

During the high-level segment of COP-6 Part II, a closed 
negotiating group on LULUCF was facilitated by Raúl Estrada 
(Argentina).

Bonn Agreement: The section on LULUCF includes a paragraph 
affirming eight governing principles for the treatment of LULUCF 
activities: 

	treatment on the basis of sound science; 

	use of consistent methodologies over time for estimation and 
reporting of activities; 

	consistency with the aim of Protocol Article 3.1 (quantified 
emissions commitments); 

	non-inclusion in accounting of "mere presence" of carbon 
stocks; 

	contribution to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use 
of natural resources; 

	accounting that does not imply transfer of commitments to a 
future commitment period; 

	accounting at the appropriate time for the reversal of a 
removal of carbon from the atmosphere; and 

	exclusion of windfall effects from accounting. 

The decision on LULUCF proposes that the Protocol Article 3.3 
definitions of "forest," "afforestation," "reforestation" and 
"deforestation" are based on changes in land use. Debits during 
the first commitment period from harvesting following 
afforestation and reforestation since 1990 are not to be greater 
than credits on the same land. Each Party may choose to apply all 
or a selection of additional activities – forest management, 
cropland management, grazing land management and revegetation – 
under Protocol Article 3.4 during the first commitment period. 
These activities must be proven to be human-induced and to have 
occurred since 1990. 

The decision lays out the following accounting rules for the first 
commitment period: net-net accounting for agricultural activities; 
accounting for forest management up to the level of a possible 
debit under Article 3.3; and negotiated Party caps included in an 
Appendix Z for Article 3.4 activities and LULUCF resulting from 
joint implementation. The decision further allows LULUCF under the 
CDM in the form of afforestation and reforestation only and limits 
such credits during the first commitment period. 

Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: The negotiating group met to 
develop draft decisions on LULUCF reflecting the political 
decision as well as the package of documents previously discussed 
in the group. A smaller drafting group co-facilitated by Andreas 
Fischlin (Switzerland) and Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland) was 
convened. Discussions centered around sections where the political 
decision was considered ambiguous and where further consultation 
was required, including the question of whether eligibility of 
LULUCF activities under Article 12 (CDM) is decided only for the 
first commitment period, or whether the current decision also 
applies to future commitment periods. Other issues included the 
Russian Federation proposal for an amendment to its cap on forest 
management credits contained in Appendix Z, and additional 
concerns regarding Party caps. The drafting group agreed on the 
Co-Chairs' draft decisions on Thursday, 26 July, with the 
exception of these issues. They were further discussed during 
Friday, 27 July, with agreement emerging on a paragraph specifying 
that LULUCF activities under the CDM in future commitment periods 
shall be decided as part of the negotiations on the second 
commitment period. A new paragraph was drafted allowing Parties to 
request that the COP reconsider its numerical value in Appendix Z 
no later than two years prior to the beginning of the first 
commitment period. 

On Friday, 27 July, delegates met in Plenary and decided that the 
draft LULUCF decisions would be forwarded for further 
consideration by, and adoption at, COP-7. 

Draft decisions forwarded to COP-7: The draft decisions on LULUCF 
(FCCC/CP/2001/L.11/Rev.1) incorporate the Bonn Agreement and 
comprise a decision, which, inter alia: 

	requests SBSTA to investigate possible biome-specific forest 
definitions and to develop definitions and modalities for 
including LULUCF activities under the CDM; and 

	invites the IPCC to elaborate methods to estimate, measure, 
monitor and report changes in carbon stocks as relevant to 
Articles 3.3 and 3.4 and LULUCF under Articles 6 and 12, and to 
prepare a report on good practice guidance and uncertainty 
management. 

The draft decisions on LULUCF also include a COP/MOP-1 decision. 
It contains principles on LULUCF in a preamble, and adopts the 
definitions, modalities, rules and guidelines related to LULUCF 
under the Protocol, which are contained in an annex, with a 
further appendix specifying the Annex I Party maximum credits from 
Article 3.4 forest management and LULUCF activities under JI 
during the first commitment period.

COMPLIANCE: Delegates met on Tuesday and Wednesday, 17-18 July, in 
a closed negotiating group co-chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway) 
and Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa). The group focused on five 
issues: the nature and legally binding nature of consequences 
applied by the enforcement branch; whether the Compliance 
Committee composition would be based on the equitable geographical 
distribution of the five UN regional groupings or tailored to the 
mandate of the branch and to the type of commitments under 
consideration; whether there would be an appeal; whether a COP/MOP 
panel would consider the reports of experts review teams; and how 
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities would affect the design and functioning of 
the Compliance Committee. 

On Thursday, 19 July, Co-Chair Slade reported to Plenary that a 
list of questions with clear options for consideration by the 
Ministers had been elaborated (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8). He explained 
that the group had identified six outstanding issues and suggested 
that the resolution of key political issues – the consequences to 
be applied by the branches and the composition of those branches – 
be given priority.

High-level discussions facilitated by Minister Valli Moosa (South 
Africa) took place on Saturday, 21 July. Progress was later 
reported to the President's Group on, inter alia, the legally-
binding nature of the compliance regime and an emphasis on 
facilitation. Late evening Saturday, President Pronk presented a 
proposal for a draft decision outlining political agreements on 
"core elements" of the BAPA.

The proposal covered eight aspects of the compliance system. Four 
elements of the proposal generated the most controversy.

	The aim of the consequences of non-compliance to be applied 
by the enforcement branch is to restore non-compliance and repair 
the damage to the environment. 

	The enforcement consequences include that payments will be 
made to repair the damage to the environment. 

	The facilitative and enforcement branches shall be composed 
of: one member from each of the five UN regional groups and one 
member of the SIDS, taking into account the practice of the Bureau 
of the UNFCCC; two members from Annex I Parties; and two members 
from non-Annex I Parties.

	The COP should adopt at its sixth session a legal instrument 
on procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance as an integral 
part of the Protocol.

Following high-level informal consultations on Saturday through 
Monday 21-23 July, during which compliance proved particularly 
contentious and difficult to resolve, ministers and other-high 
level officials agreed to a text on 23 July. The text provides, 
inter alia, that the enforcement consequences shall aim at 
ensuring "environmental integrity," rather than reparation of the 
damage to the environment, and deferring the issue of the mode of 
adoption of the compliance regime, and thus of the legally binding 
nature of its consequences, to a later stage.

Bonn Agreement: The Bonn Agreement covers eight aspects of the 
compliance system. On the mandate of the facilitative branch, the 
COP agrees that advice and facilitation shall be provided with the 
aim of promoting compliance and providing for early warning of 
non-compliance. Such facilitation will cover: quantitative 
emission commitments prior to, and during, the commitment period; 
and methodological and reporting requirements prior to the 
beginning of the first commitment period. 

On the consequences of non-compliance to be applied by the 
enforcement branch, the COP agrees that these aim at restoring 
non-compliance to ensure environmental integrity, and shall 
provide for an incentive to comply. Accordingly, enforcement 
consequences include: deduction of 1.3 times the excess emissions 
from the Party's first commitment period assigned amount, to be 
applied to the assigned amount of the second commitment period; 
development of a compliance action plan; and suspension of 
eligibility to make transfers under Article 17 (emissions 
trading). 

On the mandate of the enforcement branch, the COP agrees that this 
branch shall assess Annex I Parties' compliance with: quantitative 
emissions commitments; methodological and reporting requirements 
under Article 5.1 (national systems), 5.2 (adjustments), 7.1 
(inventories) and 7.2 (guidelines for the communication of 
information); and eligibility requirements under Articles 6 (JI), 
12 (CDM) and 17 (emissions trading). 

On appeal, the COP agrees that there will be a possibility of 
appeal to the COP/MOP in case of denial of due process. In such 
cases, the decision of the enforcement branch will only be 
overridden by a COP/MOP three-fourth majority decision. 

On principles, the COP agrees that the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities shall 
be reflected in the design of the compliance system as well as in 
the mandate of the facilitative branch. On the composition of the 
facilitative and enforcement branches, the COP agrees that both 
bodies shall be composed of: one member from each of the five UN 
regional groups and one member of the SIDS, taking into account 
the practice of the Bureau of the UNFCCC; two members from Annex I 
Parties; and two members from non-Annex I Parties. 

On decision-making, the COP agrees that, failing consensus, 
decisions shall be taken by a three-fourth majority, except in the 
case of the enforcement branch where a double majority of Annex I 
and non-Annex I Parties will also be required. Finally, on the 
adoption of the compliance system, the COP agrees to adopt, at its 
sixth session, the procedures and mechanisms relating to 
compliance "as specified above" and to recommend the adoption, by 
COP/MOP-1, of such procedures and mechanisms "in terms of Article 
18 of the Kyoto Protocol."

Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: On Wednesday, 25 July, Co-Chair 
Slade said the Co-Chairs had prepared a non-paper comprising a 
draft COP decision and an annex that they hoped would assist 
delegates in their further work. Developing countries and many 
developed countries welcomed it as providing a good basis for the 
group's further work. On Thursday, delegates proceeded through the 
Co-Chairs' non-paper on procedures and mechanisms on compliance 
under the Protocol. Delegates diverged over the legal and 
political interpretation of the Bonn Agreement with regard to the 
remaining work to be done on compliance during COP-6 Part II, and 
to the legally binding nature of the compliance regime. Developing 
countries and many Annex I Parties supported the intervention of 
President Pronk on the way forward.

On Friday, 27 July, Co-Chair Slade reported that the discussions 
had evidenced different views on some key issues in the Bonn 
Agreement. The COP took note of the draft decision on compliance 
based on the Co-Chairs' non-paper (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP12/Rev.1), and 
decided to forward it to COP-7 for completion and adoption.

Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7: The draft decision contains a 
draft COP decision, including a draft COP/MOP-1 decision, and an 
annex. 

The draft COP decision:

	decides to adopt the procedures and mechanisms on compliance 
under the Protocol annexed thereto;

	recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt such procedures and 
mechanisms in terms of Protocol Article 18; and

	recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt the following draft decision: 
COP/MOP-1 confirms the COP decision and brings the procedures and 
mechanisms on compliance under the Protocol into operation.

The annex constitutes the procedures and mechanisms on compliance 
under the Protocol and includes the elements of the Bonn Agreement 
on compliance outlined above. Other key elements of the text 
include: 

	the Compliance Committee shall take into account any degree 
of flexibility provided by the COP/MOP to the Annex I Parties 
undergoing the process to a market economy;

	members of the Committee will act in their individual 
capacities;

	the Compliance Committee shall apply the guidance received 
from the COP/MOP and the COP/MOP shall consider the report of the 
Compliance Committee;

	the facilitative branch shall promote Parties' compliance 
with their commitments, taking into account Parties' common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities;

	submissions to both branches may be made by any Party with 
respect to itself or any Party with respect to another Party;

	the facilitation of financial and technical assistance by the 
facilitative branch shall take into account UNFCCC Article 4.3 
(financial resources), 4.4 (costs of adaptation) and 4.5 
(technology transfer); and

	in case of non-compliance with Articles 5.1, 5.2, 7.1 or 7.4, 
the consequences to be applied by the enforcement branch are: 
declaration of non-compliance; and development of a plan analyzing 
the causes of non-compliance, measures to remedy non-compliance 
and a timetable for the implementation of such measures.

PROTOCOL ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8: Due to time constraints, issues 
relating to national systems, adjustments and guidelines under 
Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of 
information) and 8 (review of information) were formally only 
addressed in the context of the COP's organizational matters. In 
the Plenary on Monday, 16 July, President Pronk indicated that a 
negotiating group on these articles might be established later in 
the session. In the Plenary on Friday, 20 July, a negotiating 
group, chaired by Harald Dovland, was established. In Plenary on 
Tuesday, 24 July, the G-77/China said that the work on Articles 5, 
7 and 8 should start only after the adoption of the decisions on 
the implementation of the BAPA, while Australia and Canada urged 
that work on these articles proceed. On Wednesday, 25 July, 
President Pronk proposed that delegates focus on their remaining 
work in the previously established negotiating groups on finance, 
LULUCF, mechanisms, and compliance. Australia, Canada and New 
Zealand underlined the importance of Articles 5, 7, and 8, and 
urged that this be addressed as soon as possible. 

Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7: During the final Plenary, the 
COP took note of the draft decisions on national systems, 
adjustments and guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 (CP/2000/5/ 
Add.3 (Vol. III)) and forwarded them to COP-7 for completion and 
adoption.

ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ): This issue was supposed to 
be taken up by the SBSTA and the COP. However, due to time 
constraints, it was not discussed in-depth by the SBSTA. Parties 
decided, at the final COP plenary, to refer the decision as 
elaborated during COP-6 Part I (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5) to COP-7 for 
adoption in its current form. 

Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7: The draft decision takes note 
of the fourth synthesis report on AIJ and of the draft revised 
uniform reporting format. Under the decision, Parties decide to 
continue the pilot phase for AIJ and request the Secretariat to 
organize a workshop on the revised uniform reporting format before 
SBSTA-15.

POLICIES AND MEASURES: This matter was taken up by the SBSTA on 
Tuesday, 24 July. SBSTA Chair Dovland noted Party views submitted 
on the Terms of Reference (TOR) for a proposed workshop on "best 
practices" in policies and measures (P&Ms) among Annex I Parties, 
to be concluded at the current SBSTA session. Saudi Arabia, 
opposed by the G-77/China, CG-11, the EU, AOSIS and others, 
requested that the issue be deferred, as a decision regarding the 
workshop had not been officially adopted at COP-6 Part I. Chair 
Dovland said he would consult with President Pronk and said 
informal consultations on the TOR would be facilitated by José 
Romero (Switzerland) and Richard Muyungi (Tanzania). 

During the final SBSTA plenary on Friday, 27 July, Parties agreed 
on a draft decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.4), with minor changes. 
José Romero gave feedback on an informal meeting on P&Ms, in which 
the TOR were agreed for a workshop to be held in October 2001, 
sponsored by Denmark and Norway. Supporting the draft conclusion, 
Uruguay requested reference to "domestic" voluntary agreements. 
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, and Jordan – opposed by numerous non 
Annex I Parties, as well as Poland, the EU and Japan – objected to 
the adoption of the conclusions, arguing that these could not be 
adopted until after the formal adoption of the decision on polices 
and measures. Saudi Arabia suggested that this decision be 
deferred. Denmark and Norway noted that funding of the workshop 
was conditional on it being held before COP-7. Overriding the 
objections of Saudi Arabia, Chair Dovland ruled that SBSTA was 
entitled to decide on holding this workshop. Following a request 
from Saudi Arabia, a small group was convened to address concerns 
on the text. The small group reached agreement on a decision 
(FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.4). In accordance with the decision, SBSTA, 
inter alia: takes note of submissions by Parties on the TOR of the 
proposed workshop; accepts the offer by Denmark and Norway to host 
the workshop in October 2001; and decides to consider the report 
of the workshop at its fifteenth session.

Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7: During its final Plenary, the 
COP further agreed on a draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5) to 
be forwarded to COP-7 for adoption in its current format. The 
draft decision decides that future work on P&Ms should contribute 
to the improvement of transparency, effectiveness and 
comparability of P&Ms, by: enhancing transparency in reporting on 
P&Ms in the national communications of Annex I Parties through, as 
appropriate, criteria and quantitative parameters; facilitating 
information sharing on ways to minimize adverse effects of P&Ms; 
and assisting Parties in identifying further options for 
cooperation between Annex I Parties to enhance the individual and 
combined effectiveness of their P&Ms. The COP also decides that 
future work should contribute to the elaboration of elements for 
reporting information on demonstrable progress.

IMPACT OF SINGLE PROJECTS ON EMISSIONS IN THE COMMITMENT PERIOD: 
Due to time constraints, this issue was not discussed in-depth 
during SBSTA. Parties decided at the final COP plenary to refer 
the decision (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5), as elaborated during COP-6 
Part I, for adoption in its current format at COP-7. 

Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7: The draft decision defines a 
single project and sets the guidelines for reporting CO2 emissions 
from a single project that has come into operation since 1990.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

Delegates took up the matter of the institutional linkage of the 
UNFCCC Secretariat to the United Nations in the SBI on 24 and 27 
July, and agreed to recommend to the COP a draft decision on this 
matter based on a Note by the Executive Secretary. 

Final Decision: The decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.8) was adopted by the 
COP on Friday, 27 July. The decision notes that the linkage 
continues to provide a sound basis for the functioning of the 
Secretariat, and that UNFCCC conference servicing is being met 
from the UN regular budget. It approves the continuation of the 
current institutional linkage for an additional five-year period, 
to be reviewed by the General Assembly and the COP before 31 
December 2006, invites the Secretary-General to seek the same 
endorsement from the General Assembly at its upcoming 56th 
session, and invites it to decide also on the issue of conference 
servicing expenses.

OTHER MATTERS

During the COP Plenary held Friday, 27 July, the COP considered 
draft conclusions proposed by Canada (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.13) 
relating to its offer to hold an informal meeting on optimizing 
the uptake of cleaner or less greenhouse gas emitting energy, and 
inviting the Secretariat to convene a workshop on this issue prior 
to COP-8, and SBSTA-16 to develop recommendations for COP-8 to 
consider.

Several countries, including Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Algeria, 
expressed concern at the lack of time to consider the proposal, 
and suggested considering the Canadian proposal at COP-7. However, 
many Parties, including Japan, Argentina, Senegal, Palau and 
Malaysia, supported the text. Delegates agreed to a compromise 
whereby reference to a workshop organized by the Secretariat, and 
recommendations by SBSTA-16 to COP-8, were deleted. 

Final Conclusion: The text, as adopted, recognizes that cleaner or 
less greenhouse gas emitting energy, particularly renewables, 
hydro, geothermal and natural gas, can promote environmental 
benefits to meet the objects of the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol, and 
optimize the uptake of cleaner or less greenhouse gas emitting 
energy. It also takes note of Canada's offer to convene an 
informal workshop on this matter, and report on the outcome to 
SBSTA-15.

REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies to the UNFCCC met for their fourteenth 
sessions from 24-27 July. On Tuesday, 24 July, the Subsidiary Body 
for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific 
and Technological Advice (SBSTA) met separately to begin their 
work by addressing most of their agenda items. These meetings were 
followed by a number of informal consultations held from 24-26 
July, which resulted in draft conclusions adopted by the two 
subsidiary bodies in meetings held on Friday, 27 July. Issues 
addressed by these texts include, for the SBI, administrative and 
financial matters, and, for SBSTA, scientific and methodological 
aspects of the proposal by Brazil, policies and measures among 
Annex I Parties, and cooperation with relevant organizations. The 
subsidiary bodies both adopted their reports on the session on 27 
July (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1). The following 
section outlines issues addressed by these two bodies that the COP 
did not specifically address or take a separate decision on.

SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION: On Tuesday, 24 July, the SBI, 
chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), adopted its agenda. 

Reports on Inter-sessional Activities: Delegates considered 
reports on inter-sessional activities on 24 and 27 July 
(FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1). In particular, they considered further work 
concerning LDCs, work on the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) 
on non-Annex I communications, and ongoing activities on reporting 
and review of greenhouse gas inventories in Annex I Parties.

On further work concerning the LDCs, the SBI heard a report from 
Uganda, speaking on behalf of the coordinator for LDCs, on the 
technical input given to the Third UN Conference on the LDCs, 
which was held in Brussels in May 2001. He said that the Programme 
of Action that was adopted at this conference includes specific 
mention of the urgent need to address global environmental 
concerns on the basis of the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities. It also highlights the low 
adaptive capacity of LDCs to the adverse effects of climate 
change. Delegates also considered the development of guidelines 
for the preparation of national adaptation programmes of actions 
(NAPAs). Tuvalu, for the LDCs, reported on a workshop on this 
issue, underlining some progress on the establishment of the 
guidelines. He said more work was needed and proposed a workshop 
in the Maldives, before COP-7, to further develop NAPA guidelines. 
The SBI took note of these reports. It also thanked the Maldives 
for an offer to host the NAPA workshop.

Regarding the work of the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) on 
National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I, the 
SBI heard a preliminary report on 24 July from Group Chair Vute 
Wangwacharakul (Thailand). He noted that, in an examination of 50 
national communications, the Group had identified a number of 
problems that may be addressed, inter alia, through the provision 
of adequate financial and technical assistance. The G-77/China 
said the recommendations of the CGE were based only on a limited 
number of national communications, and that a more comprehensive 
aggregate analysis was needed, while the US said such 
recommendations should form the basis for the development of new 
guidelines for national communications to be adopted at COP-7. 
Following these statements, a Friends of the Chair group, 
facilitated by Philip Weech (Bahamas), was convened to consider 
the CGE's preliminary report. The SBI subsequently adopted the 
draft conclusions on this matter (FCCC/SBI/2001/CRP.2), which 
invites Parties to submit their views on the CGE's preliminary 
report, and on the current progress on the process to improve 
guidelines for subsequent non-Annex I national communications. The 
date set for receipt of these views is 15 September 2001. The 
conclusions request the Secretariat to compile these submissions 
and prepare a consolidated report on the matter for SBI-15.

Regarding ongoing activities on reporting and review of greenhouse 
gas inventories in Annex I Parties, the US suggested, in the SBI 
on 24 July, a more comprehensive testing of the guidelines by all 
Parties during the trial period and that revised guidelines be 
adopted at COP-8. SBI Chair Ashe said SBSTA-15 will have a 
substantive consideration of this agenda item. The SBI took note 
of the oral report on the ongoing and planned activities on this 
issue. 

Administrative and Financial Matters: SBI considered the financial 
performance for 2000-2001 on 24 and 27 July. The Secretariat 
highlighted that a revised indicative list of contributions was 
presented for 2001 (FCCC/SBI/2001/INF.2), pursuant to the adoption 
by the UN General Assembly in 2000 of a revised scale of 
assessments. The G-77/China said the General Assembly resolution 
does not automatically apply to the UNFCCC. The Secretariat also 
presented the latest status of contributions 
(FCCC/SBI/2001/INF.3/Rev.1) and noted the special annual 
contribution of DM3.5 million made by the host government, 
Germany. Several Parties expressed the concern that their 
contributions were not reflected in the list. On 27 July, the SBI 
took note of the revised scale of contributions and of the latest 
status of contributions and expressed appreciation to those 
Parties making their core contributions in a timely manner, and to 
those making voluntary contributions.

The SBI took up the matter of the programme budget for the 
biennium 2002-2003 on 24 July, when UNFCCC Executive Secretary 
Cutajar outlined details of the proposed programme budget. He 
noted that the formal adoption of the budget is scheduled for COP-
7. He said income would include indicative contributions of 
US$27.5 million, in addition to the host government's contribution 
and carry-over from previous periods. Delegates subsequently met 
in a small closed group, chaired by John Ashe, to continue 
discussions in greater detail. In the SBI meeting on 27 July, the 
G-77/China stressed the principle of equitable geographic 
representation among the staff. Japan noted that discussion on the 
programme budget is not closed and will continue at SBI-15. The 
SBI took note of the budget report.

On implementation of the Headquarters Agreement, UNFCCC Executive 
Secretary Cutajar informed the SBI on 24 July of the need to move 
an increasing number of staff to temporary accommodations, as the 
Secretariat continues to grow. An initial offer by the German 
Government for part of the former Bundeshaus complex was deemed 
insufficient to meet ongoing needs. However, he hoped the 
situation would be resolved shortly. Some progress on visas and 
other issues was also noted. Germany highlighted its commitment to 
guarantee adequate accommodation and the best possible working 
conditions for UN personnel. He said talks are ongoing to 
accommodate all UN organizations in Bonn in a single location. 
Argentina expressed concern at these visa and accommodation 
difficulties. He suggested a small committee might be established 
to consider these issues, without being involved in micro-
management. Germany said most difficulties have been addressed 
during the past year and a half, and they will take all steps 
necessary to deal with problems as they arise. Canada noted 
Argentina's "interesting" proposal but indicated some 
reservations. In the SBI meeting held on 27 July delegates thanked 
the host government for its efforts concerning the provision of 
acceptable office accommodations, and invited it to continue 
negotiations with the Secretariat to resolve this issue as soon as 
possible. The SBI also requested a progress report on this and 
other relevant matters at SBI-15.

On the juridical personality of the Secretariat on the 
international plane, the Secretariat noted that its UN 
institutional linkage had enabled it to function without an 
international juridical personality, and that it did have a 
juridical personality in Germany. The SBI decided that it would 
revisit the matter at a future date if it was deemed necessary 
that the Secretariat be vested with a juridical personality on the 
international plane.

Other Matters: The SBI took note of a proposed workshop on 
adaptation planned for the last quarter of 2001, to be convened by 
AOSIS.

Adoption of the Report: The SBI adopted the report on its 
fourteenth session on Friday morning, 27 July (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1). 
Chair Ashe thanked participants for their support, and closed the 
meeting shortly before 12:00 pm. 

SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE: The 
fourteenth session of the SBSTA began its work on Tuesday, 24 
July, chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway). At its first meeting, 
the SBSTA adopted its agenda. 

Reports on Inter-sessional Activities: Delegates considered this 
issue on 24 and 27 July, and took note of, or adopted conclusions 
on: emissions resulting from fuel use in international 
transportation; methods and tools to evaluate impacts and 
adaptation; issues related to emissions from forest harvesting and 
wood products; progress related to a technology information 
system; and UNFCCC Article 6 (education, training and public 
awareness) (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1).

On emissions resulting from fuel used in international 
transportation, the Secretariat highlighted inter-sessional work, 
as contained in a joint report with the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime 
Organization. The EU expressed concern about rising emissions from 
air transportation and noted that ICAO is scheduled to meet in 
September with a view to reaching decisions on this question. 

On 24 July, the Secretariat reported on a workshop on methods and 
tools to assess climate change impacts and adaptation, held 
recently in Canada. On 27 July, the SBSTA took note of the 
workshop and invited Parties to consider the issue further, and to 
submit views on issues identified in a report on the workshop 
(FCCC/SBSTA/2001/INF.4) by 1 October 2001, for compilation by the 
Secretariat. 

On issues related to emissions from forest harvesting and wood 
products, New Zealand reported, on 24 July, on a workshop for 
estimating and accounting for carbon dioxide emissions from forest 
harvesting and wood products, and said it is coordinating a 
further study. The SBSTA decided to consider this matter further 
at its fifteenth session.

On progress related to a technology information system, Chair 
Dovland informed the SBSTA, on 24 July, that the system is being 
regularly updated, and that Parties interested in testing the 
system should contact the Secretariat. On 27 July, delegates 
decided to consider the matter further at SBSTA-15.  

On UNFCCC Article 6, the EU, supported by many other Parties, 
outlined a proposal to the SBSTA on 24 July, to consider further 
work. Australia supported the dissemination of the IPCC TAR 
results in a manner accessible to the public. On 27 July, 
delegates adopted conclusions on this matter 
(FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.5), in which the SBSTA: thanked the Secretariat 
for its report on this issue, and welcomed the preparation of a 
further document for SBSTA-15; noted that Article 6 should be a 
substantive item on SBSTA's future agenda, and that a workshop 
might be considered following SBSTA-15; and noted the importance 
of disseminating the information contained in the IPCC's reports 
in more than the six UN languages, requesting the Secretariat to 
liaise with the IPCC on this.

Scientific and Methodological Aspects of the Proposal by Brazil: 
The SBSTA took up this matter on 24 July. On Brazil's proposal on 
reductions toward an overall emission ceiling for Annex I Parties 
allocated on the basis of each Party's relative share of 
responsibility for climate change, Chair Dovland said a workshop 
had been held to identify scientific and methodological aspects of 
the proposal. The EU noted progress in addressing the technical 
basis of the proposal, but identified several outstanding issues. 
Several developing countries warned that the work should not go 
beyond the COP's mandate. The US noted the workshop's narrow 
focus, called for consideration of other models and indicators, 
and supported continued research. Chair Dovland said informal 
consultations on draft conclusions would be undertaken by David 
Warrilow (UK) and Luis Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil).

On 27 July, Warrilow reported to the SBSTA on the informal 
consultations, noting that the group had been unable to reach 
consensus on the timing of future work. Brazil proposed that a 
side event on this issue be held at COP-7. He noted that a number 
of non-Annex I Parties thought it would be useful to have a 
workshop before SBSTA-16, focusing specifically on the scientific 
and methodological aspects. Delegates then considered the draft 
conclusions prepared on this matter (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.2). Saudi 
Arabia, supported by Venezuela and China, suggested that this 
issue only be addressed before SBSTA-18. The EU and Argentina 
urged that the meeting be held sooner. Following discussion in a 
small informal group, SBSTA agreed that it will take up the matter 
for discussion at SBSTA-16. Reference to SBSTA deciding on future 
action at this sixteenth session was deleted. Another amendment 
was accepted in terms of which SBSTA requests the Secretariat to 
review this proposal and facilitate dissemination of scientific 
and methodological information on this proposal.

The conclusions were accepted, as amended. In the conclusions, the 
SBSTA: recalls that COP-3 decided that Brazil's proposal should be 
referred to the SBSTA; take notes of a progress report on the 
issue; and encourages Parties to support the research effort on 
scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal.

Cooperation with Relevant International Organizations: At the 
SBSTA meeting on 24 July, Chair Dovland noted ongoing initiatives 
between the UNFCCC and the Convention on Biological Diversity 
(CBD), including: a CBD discussion note and responses submitted by 
the UNFCCC Parties; a CBD Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group to carry 
out a pilot assessment on advice to integrate biodiversity into 
UNFCCC implementation; and a proposed joint liaison group between 
the two Secretariats. Jan Plesnik, Chair of the CBD Subsidiary 
Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice, reported 
on initiatives in the CBD to address interlinkages between 
biodiversity and climate change. Bob Watson, IPCC Chair, reported 
on the preparation of an IPCC Technical Paper on linkages between 
climate and biodiversity. 

The SBSTA then invited Ian Carruthers (Australia) and Jimena Nieto 
Carrasco (Colombia) to undertake informal consultations on this 
matter in order to help formulate draft conclusions. On 27 July, 
the SBSTA adopted conclusions on this matter 
(FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.3).

On cooperation with other conventions, the conclusions emphasize 
the need for cooperation with other relevant conventions, 
including the CBD, and endorsed the formation of a joint liaison 
group between the UNFCCC and CBD Secretariats. It also invited the 
Secretariat of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification to 
participate in this group, in order to explore options for further 
cooperation, including the possibility of a joint work plan and/or 
workshop. Parties are invited to submit their further views on 
cooperation between the three conventions by 15 October 2001. A 
request by the CBD that IPCC develop a paper to consider relevant 
interlinkages was endorsed. 

Regarding cooperation with scientific organizations, the SBSTA 
commended the IPCC on the high quality of the Third Assessment 
Report. It also noted that support is needed for workshop planned 
by the Global Climate Observing System for the Caribbean and 
Central American and Asia regions in 2002.  

Adoption of the Report: The SBSTA adopted the report on its 
fourteenth session on Friday afternoon, 27 July 
(FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1).

CLOSING PLENARY

The closing Plenary took place on Friday evening, 27 July 2001. 
COP-6 President Pronk addressed delegates, stating that this 
meeting advanced the implementation of the UNFCCC and brought the 
Protocol closer to reality, as agreed under the BAPA. The COP then 
adopted a number of decisions relating to the agenda items on 
organizational, administrative and financial, and other matters, 
as well as on the implementation of the BAPA.

After hearing reports from the Co-Chairs of the negotiating groups 
on progress in recent days, President Pronk noted that delegates 
had now come close to adopting a balanced "package" of decisions 
on all issues under the BAPA. However, as a few outstanding items 
remained unfinished, the draft decisions would all be forwarded to 
COP-7 for final adoption. He pointed out that agreement had been 
reached on ten decisions, including those on financial issues, 
meaning their adoption at COP-7 would be a formality. Outstanding 
issues include texts on guidelines under Protocol Articles 5, 7 
and 8, compliance, the mechanisms and LULUCF. The COP took note of 
progress made and agreed to forward texts to COP-7 for final 
elaboration and adoption. 

President Pronk highlighted his aims of encouraging intensive work 
on the texts, safeguarding the integrity of the political decision 
– or "Bonn Agreement" on fulfilling the BAPA – and ensuring a fair 
process. He thanked delegates for their hard work, and said he has 
received confirmation from all groups that completion of the work 
will take place at COP-7 in way that is faithful to the Bonn 
Agreement. He added that the Bonn Agreement will make the Protocol 
ratifiable.

President Pronk praised the Bonn Agreement and the other 
achievements at this session as an outcome of dialogue, mutual 
understanding, and compromise, and evidence of the value of 
multilateral negotiations. He reminded delegates of their promise 
at the end of The Hague session not to wait another year to 
succeed with their negotiations, and said he was proud of the 
results achieved in Bonn. He expressed confidence that the 
remaining work, which is non-political, will be concluded at COP-
7.

The COP then adopted the report of the session (FCCC/CP/2001/L.1 
and Add.1).

Following this, Parties then made closing statements. Many thanked 
President Pronk for his significant contribution to the outcome of 
the resumed COP-6, and also expressed their gratitude to UNFCCC 
Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar and his staff.

Iran, on behalf of the G-77/China, said the Group had come to Bonn 
to finish unfinished work, and thanked all participants for the 
positive atmosphere of cooperation and understanding. On matters 
relating to compliance, he indicated that the G-77/China welcomed 
the Co-Chairs'non-paper (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP12/Rev.1) as a good basis 
for discussions, and said the adoption of legally binding 
consequences remained a major objective for the Group. 

Bulgaria, for CG-11, urged Parties to continue to demonstrate the 
flexibility and goodwill evident in Bonn at COP-7. Samoa, for 
AOSIS, said the resumed COP-6 outcomes have breathed new life into 
the Protocol, adding that delegates have taken an historic step 
towards creating an environmentally responsible, carbon restrained 
world. He indicated his appreciation to those Annex I countries 
involved in the Political Declaration on new and additional 
funding assistance. While noting that the Protocol is "only a 
modest first step," he highlighted its key role as offering "the 
only viable lifeline." 

Belgium, for the EU, said the Bonn Agreement lays a foundation for 
the successful conclusion of these ongoing negotiations. He said 
he was hopeful that a balanced and comprehensive package of 
decisions will be achieved at COP-7.

Australia welcomed the significant progress since the "historic" 
Bonn Agreement on Monday, 23 July. He noted with satisfaction 
agreement on issues such as finance and technology transfer, and 
looked forward to completing work on all outstanding texts at COP-
7.

Vanuatu, on behalf of the LDCs, welcomed in particular text on 
UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9. He highlighted the need to involve 
youth and their spokespeople in the process. Japan stressed the 
progress in talks over recent days, while noting that much remains 
to be done to bridge differences on compliance, the mechanisms and 
LULUCF. He said Parties should strive to complete work on all 
outstanding issues at COP-7. New Zealand said it came to Bonn to 
say "yes" to an agreement. He said the Bonn Agreement has provided 
such an affirmation, and removed remaining questions surrounding 
the ratifiability of the Protocol. Morocco extended a welcome to 
Parties to continue at Marrakech the achievements in Bonn. 
President Pronk declared the resumed COP-6 closed at 10:30 pm.

A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-6 PART II

Confounding the predictions of many, the gavel came down late 
Monday morning – midway through the two week meeting – and 
delegates rose in a standing ovation to complete a marathon 
weekend of negotiations and seal what many saw as an "historic" 
political agreement that saved the Kyoto Protocol. Few climate 
pundits had predicted a positive outcome in Bonn, and it was thus 
not surprising that praise on reaching a political agreement was 
effusive. Michael Meacher, UK Minister for the Environment, 
described it as "a brilliant day for the environment"; Peter 
Hodgson, New Zealand's Energy Minister, said "we have delivered 
probably the most comprehensive and difficult agreement in 
history"; and an NGO campaigner said that "this first small step 
is a giant leap for humanity and for the future of our planet." 

Four days later, when President Pronk formally closed COP-6 Part 
II late on Friday evening, the euphoria was far more muted. Not 
only were observers coming to appreciate the nature of the 
sacrifices made to achieve this agreement, but – more importantly 
– differences had appeared in the interpretation of Monday's 
groundbreaking agreement. At one stage, shortly after most of the 
world's press had retired home comfortable in the belief that an 
agreement had been secured, it appeared as if the entire package 
was in danger of unraveling, with the Russian Federation and other 
Umbrella Group members flexing their muscles and disputing the 
terms of the agreement. This development, coupled with the failure 
to reach closure on certain key issues – notably compliance – was 
a sobering reminder that ratification of the Protocol is not yet 
assured, nor is its environmental integrity guaranteed. 

"THE ONLY GAME IN TOWN" 

Notwithstanding these concerns, the achievement of the last two 
weeks should not be underestimated. Expectations of delivery at 
Bonn had been low. In the words of one observer, "only 
professional optimists" were predicting success, with some 
commentators forecasting the end of the Protocol and "a descent 
into environmental anarchy." President Pronk had set himself an 
ambitious agenda, and the initial prognosis was not good. Since 
the collapse of talks in The Hague, the US had pronounced the 
Protocol "fatally flawed" and withdrawn from the process, leaving 
Pronk with no viable alternative but to broker a deal that was 
sufficiently attractive to Japan and the Russian Federation, while 
at the same time maintaining the commitment of the EU and 
developing countries. Despite an active round of shuttle 
diplomacy, and a number of preliminary high-level meetings, there 
was no evidence prior to Bonn that the gulf of disagreement had 
been bridged. Midway through the first week of the Bonn talks, and 
shortly before the arrival of ministers, this gulf was still 
apparent.

It is against this backdrop of significant political divisions, 
and low expectations, that the euphoria of Monday's agreement 
should be seen. Despite the significant compromises that were 
made, the agreement is nevertheless hugely significant in that it 
has affirmed President Pronk's long stated assertion that the 
Protocol is the "only game in town." 

"KYOTO LITE" – TAKING THE FIRST STEP

COP 6 Part II will be remembered primarily for having produced the 
"Bonn Agreement," a political commitment on a package of issues 
that has facilitated ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. While to 
some observers the Bonn Agreement "falls far short of the lofty 
goals contained in the original Kyoto proposal," leading one NGO 
to refer to the agreement as "Kyoto Lite," there was nevertheless 
general support, even among some of the more skeptical NGOs, that 
a weak agreement was better than none. 

The following is a brief analysis of some of the key elements 
negotiated under the Bonn Agreement, and in talks on The Hague 
texts.

Finance: While the financial issues group was the only one to 
approve all of its draft decisions, there were diverging views on 
the final outcome. Although the agreement recognizes the need for 
"new and additional funding," and establishes three new funds, no 
specific funding level is identified and there are no new legal 
requirements on countries to provide funding. Pronk's suggested 
US$1 billion became an unrealistic option with US withdrawal from 
the Protocol.

The Kyoto Protocol adaptation fund is funded by a CDM levy and 
voluntary contributions. From a developing country perspective, 
the texts mirror the compromise that they made in the Bonn 
Agreement, under which they lost out on their previous insistence 
on mandatory funding levels or any setting of funding levels. As 
one developing country delegate expressed it "They have shown us 
the blank checks, now the question is will they actually enter any 
figures." 

LULUCF: The collapse of The Hague negotiations was attributed by 
many observers to disagreements over LULUCF issues: "It was sinks 
that sunk The Hague." In contrast, the negotiations in Bonn on 
LULUCF issues proved to be comparatively straightforward. There 
are several reasons for this. Some suggest that negotiators came 
to Bonn conscious of the fact that sinks were fatal to The Hague 
deal, and, with greater pressure to conclude a package, they had 
an increased willingness to compromise. Ironically, the compromise 
that was struck was one some noted would have satisfied the US in 
The Hague. 

With the US now out of the picture, the EU and G-77/China had to 
make significant sacrifices to keep the rest of the Umbrella Group 
on board, particularly in light of statements by Canada, Australia 
and Japan that the provision of credits under Article 3.4 was the 
key to ratification. An apparent trade-off for greater EU 
flexibility on sinks was the insistence that nuclear energy be 
removed from the CDM. While the EU's shift on sinks was a major 
concession, and one that revived concerns regarding loopholes and 
the renegotiation of the Protocol targets, most saw this as a 
necessary and beneficial trade-off for keeping the Protocol alive.

Commentators also observed that Amb. Estrada – well-known for 
forging agreements and producing results – had been brought in to 
chair discussions during the ministerial session, and suggested 
that his touch may have been evident. The resulting agreement was 
not without controversy, however. Shortly after the ministers' 
decision was agreed, but before it was formally adopted, the 
Russian Federation sought to increase the level of credit they 
could claim under forest management. Finding a solution for this 
apparent impasse, which some saw as threatening the entire 
process, required frantic scrambling to enable formal adoption of 
the Bonn Agreement. 

Mechanisms: Clarifying the nature and scope of the Kyoto 
mechanisms has always been one of the key determinants for 
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by Annex I Parties. Although 
delegates were unable to resolve all of the technical issues and 
produce a clean text, they nevertheless laid a solid foundation 
for a positive outcome at COP-7. Key to this was the political 
agreement that was reached on the identified "core issues," 
including supplementarity, eligibility, share of proceeds, the 
composition of the executive board, and sinks and nuclear 
facilities in the CDM. Agreement was also reached on technical 
issues such as baselines and additionality, small-scale CDM 
project activities, environmental impact assessments, public 
participation, and review by the executive board. As with a number 
of the other key issues, the EU made several important compromises 
on its previously stated positions, most notably on sinks. While 
they may seek some solace in the text on nuclear facilities, and 
parts of the text on eligibility requirements, it is evident that 
the desire to ensure the participation of key Umbrella Group 
countries greatly outweighed their aspirations for a stronger 
Protocol.

Compliance: For seasoned observers of the compliance negotiations, 
developments in Bonn were unexpected. Following the solid progress 
on this issue in The Hague, many expected that the Bonn 
negotiations would be comparatively straightforward. The opening 
days in Bonn dashed such optimistic forecasts, and served as a 
rude reminder to delegates that "nothing is agreed until 
everything is agreed." While most delegates left The Hague 
believing that the compliance regime would be legally binding and 
would provide for clear deterrent consequences along the lines 
proposed by the EU and developing countries, they soon realized in 
Bonn that even these core elements were forcefully disputed. A key 
reason for this change was the US withdrawal from the 
negotiations. This resulted in a significant shift in bargaining 
leverage on those key positions where, in the past, the US had 
sided with the EU and the G-77/China, rather than with other 
members of the Umbrella Group. The absence of US participation on 
these key issues, coupled with the need to ensure ratification in 
particular by the Russian Federation and Japan, resulted in a 
shift in bargaining power towards those positions favored by the 
other Umbrella Group members. This was particularly apparent in 
discussions on the legally-binding nature of enforcement 
consequences, an issue that the US, EU, Canada and the G-77/China 
had all supported in The Hague, and where the preference of 
Australia, Japan and the Russian Federation for a "politically 
binding" compliance regime was a minority view apparently with 
little chance of success. The US withdrawal, and the need for 
ratification by a suitable combination of these three countries, 
dramatically influenced the diplomatic negotiating landscape. 

The impact of this change was most clearly evidenced during the 
final stages of the high-level segment, where the issue of 
compliance constituted the major stumbling block for reaching a 
political agreement, necessitating late night calls to capitals 
and resulting in several amendments to the original Pronk "core 
elements" proposal. Unfortunately, the compromise amendment 
relating to the mode of adoption of the compliance regime, and its 
link with the legally binding nature of the compliance regime, 
later proved to be ambiguous, with major disagreement arising over 
its interpretation. During the final meetings of the compliance 
negotiating group, numerous amendments were proposed to the 
technical text by Australia, Japan, Canada and the Russian 
Federation, which some suggest has "effectively unraveled any 
progress" that had been made on compliance during the previous few 
years. The outcome of these meetings left some delegates openly 
expressing "deep disappointment and frustration." 

Despite not completing its work on compliance, COP-6 Part II made 
significant advances. These include the elaboration by the Co-
Chairs of an unbracketed non-paper that will serve as the basis 
for the resumed negotiations at COP-7, as well as securing 
political consensus on several key issues of a compliance system, 
including a breakthrough regarding the composition of the 
Compliance Committee. 

"PLAY IT, (UNCLE) SAM." 

As climate change observers look ahead to COP-7 in Morocco – a 
country synonymous to many with Bogart, Bergman and Casablanca – a 
question uppermost on the minds of many is the extent to which the 
US will be persuaded to join the climate caravan.  Will the US 
play it, "as time goes by?"

Although the US was noticeably less intrusive in Bonn – seemingly 
sticking to their commitment not to prevent others from moving 
ahead – their presence was nevertheless ubiquitous. While some 
observers claim to have seen the hand of the US in various 
submissions by other Parties (most notably that by Nigeria on 
eligibility during the first week of negotiations) their impact on 
the negotiations was far more pervasive than indulging in a little 
backroom lobbying. 

For many observers, an overriding objective of the Bonn meeting 
was to defy the US, by demonstrating that the Protocol could 
survive without its participation. This sentiment was most evident 
during the high-level plenary on Monday, 23 July, when the current 
spokesperson for the G-77/China stated that the political 
agreement was a "triumph for multilateralism over unilateralism." 
This thinly veiled attack on the US position, which was warmly 
applauded by the packed conference hall, was further underlined by 
President Pronk. Noting the growing sentiment against 
globalization, typified by the G-8 protests in Genoa, Pronk 
stressed that the Bonn Agreement demonstrates "the centrality of 
the concept of international cooperation for the higher common 
benefit of the global community."

US head of delegation, Paula Dobriansky, appeared unmoved and – 
despite being heckled – was unapologetic in reiterating the US 
position against ratification. Interestingly though, she referred 
to the Protocol as "not sound policy," a shift from earlier 
statements that it was "fatally flawed" (and a subtle shift too 
from her original written statement, in which she apparently 
deleted reference to "deeply flawed"). 

While it remains unlikely that the US position on ratification 
will change in the near future, there is no doubt that the Bonn 
Agreement has affected the international political economy of 
climate change. As European Environment Commissioner Margot 
Wallstrom put it shortly after the deal had been struck: "I think 
something has changed today in the balance of power between the US 
and the EU." Or as one US observer said: "this is a major foreign 
policy defeat for President Bush." 

The nature of the changing relationship was underlined by 
President Pronk in his final press conference, late Friday night, 
where he emphasized that the US no longer speaks of the Protocol 
as being dead. He also noted that the US business community and 
various Senators are beginning to appreciate that isolation on 
this issue will have an impact on US economic interests. With 
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol now more likely, he suggested 
that there is now an increased possibility that "it won't take 
many years before there is at least a 'joint track' approach with 
the US in addressing climate change." 

THE BONN AGREEMENT: "THE BEGINNING OF A BEAUTIFUL FRIENDSHIP?"

Despite the significant achievement in reaching political 
consensus, it became apparent towards the end of the Bonn meeting 
that not all Parties were "maintaining the spirit of Monday's 
historic agreement." This was most evident in the varying 
interpretations offered on the legally binding nature of the 
compliance regime. Some observers have questioned the motives 
behind the increasingly evident collaboration between Canada, the 
Russian Federation, Australia and Japan, even on issues upon which 
individual interests were not at stake.

While it is unlikely that – in the words of Humphrey Bogart – the 
Bonn Agreement will necessarily be the beginning of a beautiful 
friendship, it is clear that it has laid the foundation for 
possible ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. In his closing 
statement, Raúl Estrada, one of the chief architects of the Kyoto 
Protocol, underlined that COP-6 Part II has brought a "new 
dynamism to the Protocol process, and served to give new weight in 
our endeavors towards prompt ratification." But as the 
disagreements in the final few days of the Bonn meeting showed, 
there is no guarantee just yet that the Protocol will be ratified, 
and if so, at what cost to its environmental integrity.

THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-7

International Energy ProgramME Evaluation Conference: This 
conference will be held from 21-24 August 2001, in Salt Lake City, 
Utah, US. Presentations will consider energy technologies and 
services, and outline the impacts of public and private energy 
programmes, as well as products and services, targeted at 
industrial, commercial, residential and low-income markets. For 
more information, contact: Mary McCarthy Hall, Conference 
Coordinator; tel: +1-608-835-6880; fax: +1-608-835-6881; e-mail: 
marymcc@tdsnet.com; Internet: http://www.iepec.org

FIFTH UNCTAD/EARTH COUNCIL POLICY FORUM ON TRADE AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE – THE STATE OF THE GREENHOUSE GASES MARKET: This workshop 
will take place in association with the International Emissions 
Trading Association from 29-31 August 2001, in Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil. The forum will bring together public and private sector 
representatives from North and South to discuss climate change 
related issues. Participation is by invitation only. For more 
information, contact: Lucas Assunção or Gao Pronove, tel: +41-22-
917-5853/5831; fax: +41-22-907-0247; e-mail: 
lucas_assuncao@hotmail.com or gao@govida.net; Internet: 
http://www.unctad.org/ghg

INTERNATIONAL EMINENT PERSONS' MEETING ON INTER-LINKAGES: This 
meeting, providing input to the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable 
Development, will convene from 3-4 September 2001, in Tokyo. The 
topic of the meeting, which is being jointly organized by United 
Nations University, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and 
Environment of Japan and the Global Legislators Organization for a 
Balanced Environment (GLOBE) will be "Strategies for bridging 
problems and solutions to work towards sustainable development." 
For more information, contact: Jerry Velasquez, United Nations 
University; tel: +81-3-5467-1301; fax: +81-3-3407-8164; e-mail: 
jerry@geic.or.jp; Internet: http://www.unu.edu or 
http://www.geic.or.jp/

Emissions MarketIng Association FIFth Annual Fall Meeting and 
International Conference: This meeting will be held from 30 
September - 2 October 2001, in South Carolina, US. Topics will 
include: voluntary carbon dioxide commitments/GHG trading pilots; 
international perspectives on COP-7; state and provincial actions 
on climate change (focus on registries); state-based multi-
pollutant legislation; emissions portfolio risk management in a 
dynamic market; SO2 and Nox emissions trading trends; system 
design; and legal issues. For more information, contact: David 
Feldner, Emissions Marketing Association Executive Director; tel: 
+1-414-276-3819; e-mail: dfeldner@emissions.org; Internet: 
http://www.emissions.org/conferences/default.html

18TH SESSION OF THE IPCC PLENARY: This meeting will be held from 
24-29 September 2001, in London, UK. The purpose of the meeting is 
to adopt/approve the Synthesis Report. For more information, 
contact: Renate Christ, IPCC Secretariat, tel: +41-22-730-8574; 
fax: +41-22-730-8025; e-mail: christ_r@gateway.wmo.ch; Internet: 
http://www.ipcc.ch/

13TH MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL: MOP-13 will 
be held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, from 15-19 October 2001. For more 
information, contact: Ozone Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-1234; fax: 
+254-2-62-3601; Internet: http://www.unep.org/ozone/

17TH EUROPEAN PHOTO-VOLTAIC SOLAR ENERGY CONFERENCE AND 
EXHIBITION: This conference will be held from 22-26 October 2001, 
in Munich, Germany. Subjects to be addressed include: 
fundamentals, novel devices and new materials; crystalline silicon 
solar cells; photo-voltaic systems technology; and use of photo-
voltaic by developing countries. For more information contact: 
WIP; tel: +49-89-720-1235; fax: +49-89-720-1291; e-mail:  
wip@wip-munich.de; Internet:  
http://www.wip-munich.de/conferences/pv/munich_2001/munich.html 

INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ARCTIC FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CHANGE: This 
symposium will be held from 25-27 October 2001, in Rovaniemi, 
Finland. It is sponsored by the Nordic Arctic Research Programme 
and the Academy of Finland, and will feature a summary of Global 
Climate Model results for the Arctic, including in relation to the 
marine sector, terrestrial ecosystems, freshwater ecosystems and 
icecaps/glaciers. For more information, contact: Peter Kuhry; tel: 
+358-16-341-2758; e-mail: peter.kuhry@urova.fi

SEVENTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION 
ON CLIMATE CHANGE: COP-7 is scheduled to take place from 29 
October - 9 November 2001, in Marrakech, Morocco. For more 
information, contact: the UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-
1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; 
Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/



This issue of the Earth Negotiations Bulletin © <enb@iisd.org> is 
written and edited by Jon Hanks <jon@iisd.org>, Lisa Schipper 
<lisa@iisd.org>, Malena Sell <malena@iisd.org>, Chris Spence 
<chris@iisd.org> and Juliette Voinov <cedrickohler@msn.com>. The 
Digital Editor is Franz Dejon <franz@iisd.org> and the 
photographer is Leila Mead <leila@iisd.org>. The Operations 
Manager is Marcela Rojo <marcela@iisd.org> and the On-Line 
Assistant is Diego Noguera <diego@iisd.org>. The Editor is Pamela 
S. Chasek, Ph.D. <pam@iisd.org> and the Director of IISD Reporting 
Services is Langston James "Kimo" Goree VI <kimo@iisd.org>. The 
Sustaining Donors of the Bulletin are the Netherlands Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, the Government of Canada (through CIDA), the 
United States (through USAID), the Swiss Agency for Environment, 
Forests and Landscape (SAEFL), the United Kingdom (through the 
Department for International Development -DfID, and the Foreign & 
Commonwealth Office), the European Commission (DG-ENV), the Danish 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Government of Germany 
(through the German Federal Ministry of Environment - BMU, and the 
German Federal Ministry of Development Cooperation - BMZ). General 
Support for the Bulletin during 2001 is provided by the Ministries 
of Foreign Affairs and Environment of Finland, the Government of 
Australia, the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of Sweden, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of 
New Zealand, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Environment of 
Norway, Swan International, and the Japan Environment Agency 
(through the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies – 
IGES). The Bulletin can be contacted by e-mail at <enb@iisd.org> 
and at tel: +1-212-644-0204; fax: +1-212-644-0206. IISD can be 
contacted by e-mail at <info@iisd.ca> and at 161 Portage Avenue 
East, 6th Floor, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3B 0Y4, Canada.The opinions 
expressed in the Earth Negotiations Bulletin are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of IISD and other 
funders. Excerpts from the Earth Negotiations Bulletin may be used 
in non-commercial publications only and only with appropriate 
academic citation. For permission to use this material in 
commercial publications, contact the Director of IISD Reporting 
Services. Electronic versions of the Bulletin are sent to e-mail 
distribution lists and can be found on the Linkages WWW server at 
http://www.iisd.ca. The satellite image was taken above Bonn ©2001 
The Living Earth, Inc. http://livingearth.com. For information on 
the Earth Negotiations Bulletin or to arrange coverage of a 
meeting, conference or workshop, send e-mail to the Director, IISD 
Reporting Services at <kimo@iisd.org>.


